doc/app/index.rst, before:

############
The ``apps``
############

``cogent3`` comes with pre-defined "apps". These are capabilities that can be used by themselves, or added together to define a pipeline. Apps that can be combined into a pipeline are called *composable*.

.. The goal is to allow using apps without requiring detailed understanding of programming. In other words, being able to use them as functions without writing loops or conditionals.

Overview
========

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    warning
    app-overview
    dstore
    not-completed
    available-apps

The ``progressive_align`` App
=============================

``cogent3`` has a built-in progressive aligner. This is a tree-based HMM aligner that can use any ``cogent3`` substitution model.

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    align-nucleotide
    align-codon
    align-protein


The ``model`` App
=================

``cogent3`` possesses unique capabilities for molecular evolutionary analyses. Of particular significance are our non-stationary model classes and the associated measurement of genetic distance from these. That said, we also implement most of the conventional substitution models. See ``cogent3.available_models()`` for a display of the built-in models.

You can use these models either through the general ``model`` app, or some task specific apps. Both are described below.

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    evo-model
    evo-model-with-tree
    evo-model-timehet
    evo-extract-model-stats
    evo-ancestral-states
    evo-dt-nuc-model
    evo-tr-nuc-model
    evo-nstat-codon-model
    evo-tr-codon-model

The ``hypothesis`` App
======================

Takes two (or more) ``model`` instances and performs hypothesis test.

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    evo-hypothesis

The ``natsel`` Apps
===================

These apps all employ codon models to evaluate different types of hypotheses regarding the mode of natural selection.

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    evo-natsel_neutral
    evo-natsel_timehet
    evo-natsel_sitehet
    evo-natsel_zhang


Write your own Apps
===================

You can write your own apps.

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    user_function

Commit message:

DOC: update docs on apps
[NEW] add a sqlitedb demo file

[NEW] document new top level funcs, app_help and get_app

[CHANGED] use get_app for all examples

doc/app/index.rst, after:

############
The ``apps``
############

``cogent3`` comes with pre-defined "apps" which perform single functions that can be configured by the user. Apps are designed to enable usage without requiring detailed understanding of programming and so they can be applied in batch to a large amount of data. In other words, being able to use them as functions without writing loops or conditionals.

Apps can be used by themselves, or added together to define a "composed function" (aka pipeline). Composed functions can be applied to a single, or thousands, of data file(s).

Apps have several key features

#. trap errors
#. check the validity of input data
#. can be used by themselves or combined into a "composed" app
#. automatically track the relationship between an input data record and its output record

Overview
========

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    app-overview
    app-help
    app-get
    available-apps
    dstore
    not-completed

The ``progressive_align`` App
=============================

``cogent3`` has a built-in progressive aligner. This is a tree-based HMM aligner that can use any ``cogent3`` substitution model.

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    align-nucleotide
    align-codon
    align-protein

The ``model`` App
=================

``cogent3`` possesses unique capabilities for molecular evolutionary analyses. Of particular significance are our non-stationary model classes and the associated measurement of genetic distance from these. That said, we also implement most of the conventional substitution models. See ``cogent3.available_models()`` for a display of the built-in models.

You can use these models either through the general ``model`` app, or some task specific apps. Both are described below.

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    evo-model
    evo-model-with-tree
    evo-model-timehet
    evo-extract-model-stats
    evo-ancestral-states
    evo-dt-nuc-model
    evo-tr-nuc-model
    evo-nstat-codon-model
    evo-tr-codon-model

The ``hypothesis`` App
======================

Takes two (or more) ``model`` instances and performs hypothesis test.

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    evo-hypothesis

The ``natsel`` Apps
===================

These apps all employ codon models to evaluate different types of hypotheses regarding the mode of natural selection.

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    evo-natsel_neutral
    evo-natsel_timehet
    evo-natsel_sitehet
    evo-natsel_zhang


Write your own Apps
===================

You can write your own apps.

.. toctree::
    :maxdepth: 1

    user_function
