doc/index.rst, before:

#############
Documentation
#############

.. panels::
    :header: text-white bg-primary font-weight-bold
    
    ---

    cogent3 apps
    ^^^^^^^^^^^^
    
    Pre-defined "apps" simplify complex tasks. They provide capabilities that can be used by themselves, or added together to define a pipeline.

    +++++++++++

    .. link-button:: app/index
        :type: ref
        :text:
        :classes: stretched-link

    ---

    Cookbook
    ^^^^^^^^

    Short "how-to" code recipes targeted at specific problems.

    +++++++++++

    .. link-button:: cookbook/index
        :type: ref
        :text:
        :classes: stretched-link

    ---

    Tutorials
    ^^^^^^^^^

    Code for solving more extensive problems.
    
    +++++++++++

    .. link-button:: examples/index
        :type: ref
        :text:
        :classes: stretched-link

    ---

    API
    ^^^

    The API for major ``cogent3`` objects.
    
    +++++++++++

    .. link-button:: api/index
        :type: ref
        :text:
        :classes: stretched-link

.. toctree::
    :hidden:
    :maxdepth: 3

    app/index
    cookbook/index
    examples/index
    api/index

.. _cogent3: https://cogent3.org

Commit message:

DOC move info about data files to top-level

doc/index.rst, after:

#############
Documentation
#############

.. panels::
    :header: text-white bg-primary font-weight-bold
    
    ---

    cogent3 apps
    ^^^^^^^^^^^^
    
    Pre-defined "apps" simplify complex tasks. They provide capabilities that can be used by themselves, or added together to define a pipeline.

    +++++++++++

    .. link-button:: app/index
        :type: ref
        :text:
        :classes: stretched-link

    ---

    Cookbook
    ^^^^^^^^

    Short "how-to" code recipes targeted at specific problems.

    +++++++++++

    .. link-button:: cookbook/index
        :type: ref
        :text:
        :classes: stretched-link

    ---

    Tutorials
    ^^^^^^^^^

    Code for solving more extensive problems.
    
    +++++++++++

    .. link-button:: examples/index
        :type: ref
        :text:
        :classes: stretched-link

    ---

    API
    ^^^

    The API for major ``cogent3`` objects.
    
    +++++++++++

    .. link-button:: api/index
        :type: ref
        :text:
        :classes: stretched-link


.. note:: See :ref:`data_links` for data the files used.

.. toctree::
    :hidden:
    :maxdepth: 3

    app/index
    cookbook/index
    examples/index
    api/index

.. _cogent3: https://cogent3.org
